                  QUESTION PAGE                 
Question 1.----------------
 Which of the following statements is/ are correct? 1. Claudius Ptolemy was the first to put forward the heliocentric view of the Universe. 2. Copernicus was the first to propose the size of the Universe.  According to Hubble the diameter of the observable universe is 2.5 billion light-years. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 2.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Earth: 1. Earth is the largest of the terrestrial planets. 2. Earth is exactly one astronomical unit away from the Sun. 3. Earth’s axis of rotation is tilted exactly 23 degrees. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 3.----------------
 Which of the following pairs of the scientists proposed the modern theory of “Origin of Life”?
Question 4.----------------
 Baryosphere includes which of the following regions of the Earth? 1. Mantle 2. Inner Core 3. Outer Core 4. Asthenosphere 5. Lithosphere Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 5.----------------
 In which of the following region is the Kuiper belt found?
Question 6.----------------
 If a clock at 15°N 60°W shows 12 AM then what will it show at 65°S 60°E at the same time?
Question 7.----------------
 Arrange the following countries into the decreasing number of their time zones? 1. Russia 2. France 3. United Kingdom 4. China Select the correct order using the codes given below:
Question 8.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Comets are found in the asteroid belt of the solar system. 2. Some of the life-supporting materials were delivered by these comets. 3. When a meteoroid survives a trip through the atmosphere and hits the ground it’s called the meteor. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 9.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding our solar system: 1. Neptune is the only planet in our solar system not visible to the naked eye. 2. Earth is the only planet that has a single moon. 3. Our moon is the smallest moon in the solar system. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 10.----------------
 Match the following lists: List-I List-II A. Galileo 1. Saturn ring B. Cassini 2. Distance of Mars from Earth C. Huygens 3. Comets D. Messier 4. Moons of Jupiter Select the correct match using the codes given below: A BCD
Question 11.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding the “Great Red Spot” is correct? Jupiter. recorded on Earth
Question 12.----------------
 Which of the following evidences prove the sphericity of the Earth? 1. Lunar eclipse 2. Sunrise and sunset 3. Shape of the horizon 4. Spherical Planetary bodies Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 13.----------------
 Through which of the following states the Standard Meridian of India passes? 1. Andhra Pradesh 2. Telangana 3. Madhya Pradesh 4 Odisha Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 14.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the apparent movement of the Sun: 1. The sun is vertically overhead at the equator always. 2. The Sun is never overhead at any time of the year beyond the tropics 3. At the poles the days and nights are never equal. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 15.----------------
 In the context of dawn and twilight consider the following statements: 1. Dawn and twilight occur when the sun is below the horizon. 2. The period of dawn and twilight is longer at the equator as compared to the poles. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 16.----------------
  Which of the following statement is incorrect regarding Oort cloud? icy objects that exist in the outermost reaches of the solar system. the Sun and it can be disrupted by the nearby passage of a star. crSCORE is thought to be the origin of most of the long-period comets that have been observed
Question 17.----------------
 Objects in the Oort cloud are also referred to as  Trans-Neptunian objects. Consider the following statements: 1. The Equator is halfway between the North and South Poles and divides the Earth into the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. 2. As the earth is slightly flattened at the poles the linear distance of a degree of latitude at the pole is a little smaller than that at the equator. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 18.----------------
  Which of the following is not a direct source of information regarding the earth’s interior? 1. Voleanic Eruption 2. Gravitational Field 3. Mining 4. Falling Meteors Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
Question 19.----------------
 Regarding the seismic waves consider the following: 1. Love waves are the fastest surface waves and move on ground side to side. 2. Rayleigh waves rolls along the ground just like a wave roll across a lake or an ocean. 3. Secondary waves are longitudinal or compressive in nature Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 20.----------------
 Consider the following discontunities: 1. Repetti discontinuity 2. Conrad discontinuity 3. Lehmann discontinuity 4. Gutenberg discontinuity What is the correct order from top to bottom?
Question 21.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding “Ansupa Lake” which has been recently in news. 1. Ansupa Lake is one of the largest fresh water lake of Odisha 2. It was created by Mahanadi and got a shape like the hoof of a horse. 3. The lake is surrounded with high hills. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
Question 22.----------------
 Consider the following statements. 1. This animal has been accorded protection from trade for the first time. 2. There is currently only one recognized species with nine sub-species of this particular animal. 3. They have been listed as ‘vulnerable’ on the International Union for Conservation of Species Red List with some sub-species classified as ‘endangered” or ‘critically endangered’. The above statements are related to which one of the following animal?
Question 23.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding “KALIA scheme” which has been recently in news. 1. Scheme is been started by the Odisha government 2. Financial assistance of Rs.25 000/- per farm family over five seasons will be provided to small and marginal farmers. 3. Life insurance cover of Rs. 2.00 lakh at a very nominal premium of Rs.330/- will be provided to all savings bank account holder of age between 18-50 years. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
Question 24.----------------
 “siRNAs” term seen recently in news is related to which of the following? pesticide alternative to protect plants form viral infection. It is a new missile system developed by DRDO by NASA
Question 25.----------------
 in India which is damaging the crops of south India.  Which of the following state has not declared a State Butterfly yet?
Question 26.----------------
 Consider the following sources: 1. Magma obtained from a_ volcanic eruption. Materials obtained from the meteors. Materials collected at different depths during the “Deep Ocean Drilling Project”. Which of the above is/are not a direct of the Earth?
Question 27.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding geomagnetism: 1. Geomagnetic dipole does not coincide with the Earth’s axis of rotation rather it is parallel to it. 2. The Earth has more than two magnetic poles.  Currently the magnetic north pole is in Siberia. 4. The north and the south poles swap places on a geological time scale. Which of the above statements are correct?
Question 28.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the interior of the Earth: 1. Barysphere includes both mantle and core. 2. The asthenosphere is present entirely in mantle.  Mohorovicic discontinuity forms the boundary between the outer core and the mantle. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 29.----------------
 Which of the following statements is/ are correct? 1. Aluminium is the most abundant metal in the crust. 2. Oxygen is the most abundant element in the Earth. Select the correct option using the code given below:
Question 30.----------------
 Which of the following statements is/ are correct? 1. ‘Lithification’ is a process of porosity destruction. 2. Both weathering and erosion are covered under ‘Denudation’. Select the correct option using the codes given below.
Question 31.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Nearly 90% of the crust is made up of igneous rocks. Graphite is a sedimentary rock. Sedimentary rocks are formed by the lithification of denuded rocks. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 32.----------------
 How is Feldspar different from Pyroxene? 1. Pyroxene has a larger share than the Feldspar in the composition of the earth’s crust. 2. Pyroxene is green or black in color while Feldspar is light cream or salmon pink. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 33.----------------
 Which of the following is/are correct in the context of the ‘rock cycle’? 1. Metamorphic rocks through continuous denudation change into igneous rocks. 2. Sedimentary rocks upon melting in the interior changes into metamorphic rocks.  Igneous rocks under high pressure and heat transformed into metamorphic rocks. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 34.----------------
 crSCORE Which of the following characteristics can be associated with metamorphic rocks? 1. Reerystallization 2. Foliation 3. Abundant fossil presence 4. Banding Select the correct answer using the code given below.
Question 35.----------------
 Consider the following statements about minerals. 1. There is no single element mineral found on the planet. 2. Minerals can be organic as well as inorganic.  They have an_ orderly atomic structure but lack a definite chemical composition. Which of the above statements is/are Incorrect?
Question 36.----------------
 Which of the following are the causes of the physical weathering? 1. Repeated wetting and drying 2. Frost action 3. Hydration Biotic factors Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 37.----------------
 1 and 4 only 23 and 4 only 1 and 2 only 12 3 and 4 Consider the following pairs regarding the processes of erosion: 1. Corrasion: wear and tear of the transported materials 2. Attrition: mechanical grinding of the large materials 8. Corrosion: chemical reaction by water with the materials Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 38.----------------
  Which of the following statements regarding cryosols is/are correct? 1. These types of soils are found in the region of the brackish water. 2. They are rich Phosphorous. in Nitrogen and Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 39.----------------
  Which of the following soil develops because of intense leaching?
Question 40.----------------
 Consider the following features of the Red and Yellow soil found in India: 1. It develops on crystalline igneous rocks. 2. Itdevelops a reddish color when it is in a hydrated form. 3. They are found in the Western Ghats only. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 41.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Alluvial soil in India: 1. Khadar is the new alluvium and is deposited by floods annually. 2. Bhangar represents a system of older alluvium deposited near from the flood plains. 3. Both the Khadar and Bhangar soils contain calcareous concretions Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 42.----------------
  Which of the following statement is incorrect regarding the soils in India? deep and impermeable Red and Yellow soils are generally poor in nitrogen phosphorous and humus decreases from the east to west. Laterite Soil are the result of intense leaching due to tropical rains.
Question 43.----------------
 Rice Ragi Sugarcane and Cashew nuts are cultivated mainly on which of the following soils?
Question 44.----------------
 Consider the following features: 1. These soils are found in the drier parts of Bihar Uttar Pradesh Haryana Punjab Rajasthan etc. 2. These soils are known by different names such as reh kallar usara etc. 3. They have more salts largely because of dry climate and poor drainage. 4. Seawater intrusions in the deltas promote their occurrence. The following are the feature of which Soil?
Question 45.----------------
 Based on the presence of acid forming radical silicon igneous rocks are divided into Acid Rocks and Basic Rocks. Consider the following statements regarding this: 1. Acid Rocks are characterized by high content of silica. 2. Acid rocks constitute the SiMa portion of the crust. 3. Basic rocks flows and spreads far away and gives rise to Plateaus. Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 46.----------------
 Kajin Sara Lake is located in which neighbouring country of India?
Question 47.----------------
  Arrange the following shrines of the Char Dham in the west to east order: 1. Gangotri 2. Yamunotri 3. Kedarnath 4. Badrinath Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 48.----------------
 crSCORE the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: List-I List-IT A. Sikkim 1. Lipulekh Pass B. Himachal 2. Nathu La Pass Pradesh C. Jammu and 3. Shipki La Kashmir D. Uttarakhand 4. Zoji La Codes: A B C D
Question 49.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Chilika Lake: 1. Itis the largest coastal lagoon in India and the second largest coastal lagoon in the world. 2. The Nalaban Island within the lagoon is classified as a Bird Sanctuary under the Wildlife Protection Act. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 50.----------------
 Strait of Gibraltar connects which two water bodies? Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea
Question 51.----------------
 Black Sea and Caspian Sea North Sea and Baltic Sea Which of the following statements regarding diastrophism is/are correct? 1. Diastrophism refers to the deformation of the Earth’s crust due to diastrophic movements. 2. Diastrophic movements are sudden movements. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 52.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the geomorphic process: 1. Both endogenic and exogenic forces are required to shape the landform on the Earth’s surface. 2. Exogenic forces cause aggradation whereas the endogenic forces degradation. 3. The source of energy for the exogenic process is atmosphere whereas that for the endogenic process is the Earth herself. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 53.----------------
 Consider the following pairs regarding intrusive landforms: 1. Lacoliths: landforms dome-shaped intrusive 2. Sills: vertical intrusive landforms  Lapoliths: saucer-shaped landforms Which of the above pairs is correctly matched?
Question 54.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Earthquake Waves: 1. All the natural earthquakes take place in the asthenosphere. 2. Like light waves they too reflect and refract. 3. Thepoint wherethese wavesoriginateis called the epicenter of the earthquake. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 55.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding types of earthquake waves: 1. Body waves are faster and more damaging than the surface waves. 2. P-waves propagation reveals that the outer core of the Earth is in liquid form. 3. P- waves propagate longitudinally while S-waves transversally. 4. Rayleigh waves are the slowest of all the seismic wave type. Which of the following statements are incorrect?
Question 56.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding measurement of Earthquakes: 1 and 2 only 1 and 3 only 2 and 4 only 3 and 4 only 1. Richter scale unlike the Mercalli scale is open-ended. 2. While the Mercalli scale measures the intensity of an earthquake based on its actual impacts the Richter scale measures the earthquake’s magnitude by measuring the energy released during the earthquake.  The Mercalli scale is linear and the Richter scale is logarithmic based on Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 57.----------------
 Which of the following is not an extrusive volcanic landform?
Question 58.----------------
 Match the following pairs regarding distribution of volcanoes: List-I List-II A. Ring of fire 1. Caribbean Islands B. No volcanoes 2. Pacific Ocean rim C. Mauna Loa 3. Intra-plate volcanoes D. Island arc 4 Himalayas Select the correct match using the codes given below: A BCD Consider the following list: 1. dJig-Saw-Fit 2. Placer Deposits 3. Convectional Current Theory Which of the above list supports the continental drift theory?
Question 59.----------------
 Alfred Wegner’s continental drift theory was rejected. Which of the following reasons were the cause of its rejection? 1. Coastlines are a temporary feature and are liable to change. 2. Forces such as tidal and pole fleeing are too weak to be able to move continents. 3. The theory of sea-floor spreading started a revolution in the Earth Sciences. 4. Platetectonicsexplainsthatthe position of the poles constantly drifted. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 60.----------------
 With reference to seafloor spreading consider the following statements: 1. The age of the rocks increases as one moves away from the crest due to continuous volcanic eruptions. 2. The deep trenches have deep-seated earthquakes while in the mid-oceanic ridge areas the quake foci have shallow depths. Which of the above list is/are the correct?
Question 61.----------------
 The caroline plate is located between__ plates
Question 62.----------------
 plates  Which of the following statements regarding plate tectonics is correct? 1. Itsnotcontinent rather the continental plates move over the ocean. 2. Both continental and oceanic plates are formed as well as consumed over a period. Select the correct option using the codes given below
Question 63.----------------
  With reference to the plate movement consider the following statements: 1. Different plates move with different rates. 2. Indian Plate moves northwards at 1.2 cm/yr. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 64.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: 1. Ural: young fold mountains 2. Rockies: old fold mountains 3. The Himalayas: Alpine mountains Which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 65.----------------
 Consider the following regions: 1. Baikal Rift Zone 2. Aden Ridge 3. Juande Fuca Ridge 4. East Pacific Rise Which of the following are the regions of Divergent Plate Boundaries?
Question 66.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: 1. Monoclinal Fold: one limb makes a right angle with the surface but the other limb is ordinarily inclined. 2. Recumbent Fold: In this fold the two limbs are so much inclined that they become horizontal. 3. Isoclinal Fold: the axis of the fold is not parallel to the horizontal but makes an angle with it. Which of the following pairs is/are incorrectly matched?
Question 67.----------------
 Which of the following statements is correct regarding the Types of Lava? density and have a high percentage of silica but poor in silica.
Question 68.----------------
 Which of the following regions does not fall under the Circum Pacific Belt? 1. Kamchatka 2. Alpine Mountain Chain 3. St. Helens 4. Solomon Islands Select the correct option from the codes given below:
Question 69.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Earthquake: 1. The point where the energy is released is called the focus or hypocentre of an earthquake. 2. Body waves are generated at the focus and move in all the directions through the body of the Earth. 3. The propagation and vibration of the P-waves are in a same direction similar to the light waves. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 70.----------------
 Consider the following Statements regarding International Fund for 1. The International Fund for Animal Welfare is a global non-profit helping animals and people thrive together. 2. Work is to Rescue rehabilitate and release animals and to restore and protect their natural habitats. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 71.----------------
 Consider the following Statements regarding recently released RBI’s annual report 1. The report is released every 2 years 2. The central bank has forecast India’s GDP to grow at 6.9% for FY20 Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 72.----------------
 Consider the following Statements regarding CAMPA 1. State Governments will utilize this fund for the enhancement of forestry activities to achieve the objectives of the Nationally-Determined Contributions 2. The objective of the NDCs is to increase its forest and tree cover. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 73.----------------
 90:90:90 targets are related to which of the following diseases?
Question 74.----------------
 Consider the following statements about desertification in India 1. Almost a quarter of country’s total area is undergoing land degradation. 2. The biggest reason for desertification in India is wind erosion. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
Question 75.----------------
 Consider the following Landforms: Cirque Moraines Barchans Sw wp Stalagmites 5. Hanging valleys Which of the above are the Erosional Landforms?
Question 76.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: 1. River capture: wind gap 2. Ox-Bow lakes: Lower course 3. River Rejuvenation: Due to the rise in the sea level Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 77.----------------
 Match the following lists regarding the types of deltas: Rivers Types of Delta A. Nile 1. Estuarine B. Mississippi 2. Arcuate C. Yellow 3. Cuspate D. Tiber 4. Bird’s foot Select the correct match using the codes given below: A B Cc OD © 2 4 1 8 d@) 2 3 1 2 Which of the following statements is/ are incorrect? 1. When several alluvial fans get combined it forms the Terai region. 2. When several alluvial cones get combined it forms the Bhabhar region. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 78.----------------
 Which of the following are the prerequisites for the groundwater to form the Karst topography? 1. Hard parent rocks 2. High rainfall 3. Presence of joints in the rocks Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 79.----------------
 TA Consider the following statements about lagoons: 1. It forms when barrier bars and spits form at the mouth of a bay and block it. 2. It got filled up by sediments from the land and giving rise to a coastal plain. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 80.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Beaches: 1. Beaches are deposited by breaker waves between high and low tidewaters. 2. These are formed when the winds are of high velocity. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 81.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding snow line: 1. Snow line is a zone between the parent rock and seasonal snow. 2. Movingequator to polewards the height of the snowline keeps decreasing.  The average temperature is always below freezing point at the snow line. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 82.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Barchans are types of sand dunes. 2. The plain formed by the deposition of very thin soil particles is playa. crSCORE Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 83.----------------
 Consider the following three types of coral reefs: 1. Barrier reefs 2. Fringing reefs 3. Atolls Arrange these reefs chronologically in their evolution as per Charles Darwin:
Question 84.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Course of a River: 1. Waterfalls and rapids disappear during the old stage. 2. During the youth stage streams are plenty with good integration. 3. The valleys in the matured stage are still V-shaped but deep. Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 85.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Depositional landforms of Groundwater: 1. Stalagmites form due to dripping water from the surface or through the thin pipe of the stalactite immediately below it. 2. The  stalagmite and __ stalactites eventually fuse to give rise to columns and pillars of same diameters. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 86.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Depositional Landforms: 1. Alluvial fans are formed when streams flowing from higher levels break into foot slope plains of low gradient. 2. As the delta grows the _ river distributaries continue to decrease in length and delta continues to build up into the sea. 3. Meander is not a landform but is only a type of channel pattern. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 87.----------------
  Which of the following statement is incorrect regarding the Erosional Landforms? ridges that are usually three to four times longer than they are wide. rock standing prominently in the deserts. called alkali flats. In zeugen the harder rock layer usually lies beneath a surface layer of more softer rock.
Question 88.----------------
 Consider the pairs regarding the following depositional landforms: 1. Dunes: These are collections of loose sand built piece meal by the wind 2. Ripples: These are the smallest Aeolian bed form. 3. Loess: These are the _ terrestrial sediment composed largely of windblown silt particles made of quartz. Which of the following is/are correctly matched?
Question 89.----------------
 Consider the following statements with respect to the factors and forces leading to the formation of coastal landforms: 1. Waves help to move eroded debris and deposit it as silt sand and gravel along the coasts. 2. Small waves cause sediment to be transported toward the coast and to become deposited on the beach. 3. Longshore drift is a geological process that consists of the transportation of sediments along a coast parallel to the shoreline. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 90.----------------
 3 only 1 and 2 only  Which of the following statements is/ are correct regarding the landforms created by Ground Water? 1. Physical or mechanical removal of materials by moving groundwater is significant in developing landforms. 2. Karst topography in Balkan developed by groundwater through the process of deposition. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 91.----------------
 Consider the following glacial landforms: 1. Horns 2. Drumlins 3. Cols 4. Kettle ceRJSCORE Which of the following is/are depositional landforms?
Question 92.----------------
 Consider the following: Types of Characteristics Moraines When mater deposited at either of the sides of the glacier 1. Terminal moraine 2. Lateral moraine Material dropped at the end of valley glacial in the form of a ridge  Ground moraine’ Excessive _ glacier deposited on _ its own bed Which of the above matched?
Question 93.----------------
 pairs are correctly Which of the following statements regarding the low sedimentary coasts is/are incorrect? 1. The land slopes gently into the water. 2. Marshes and swamps abound away from the coasts.  The rivers extend their length by building coastal plains and deltas. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 94.----------------
 Consider the following statements about food fortification in India: 1. It is the addition of key vitamins and minerals to staple foods such as rice milk and salt. 2. The manufacturers of the fortified food are required to provide a quality assurance undertaking. 3. Packaging and labelling of the fortified food must state the food fortificant added logo and the tagline “Sampoorna Poshan Swasth Jeevan”. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
Question 95.----------------
 Consider the following statements about coral reefs: 1. Coral species that build reef and look like colourful plants or graceful trees are called soft corals. 2. The Great Barrier Reef located off New Zealand’s East Coast is the largest coral reef in the world. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
Question 96.----------------
 Consider the following statements about desertification in India 1. Almost a quarter of country’s total area is undergoing land degradation. 2. The biggest reason for desertification in India is wind erosion. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
Question 97.----------------
  90:90:90 targets are related to which of the following diseases?
Question 98.----------------
 Recently a creature known as Tardigrade was discovered on an Israeli spacecraft. What is the unique characteristic of this creature? bacteria
Question 99.----------------
 REKREKEREERE Consider the following statements regarding climate and weather: 1. Climate is the average atmospheric conditions of an area over a long time. 2. The weather varies tremendously whereas the climate is always constant in a region. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 100.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the forces affecting wind: 1. The Coriolis force acts perpendicular to the pressure gradient force 2. More the Coriolis force the more will be the speed of wind. 3. Pressure Gradient Force is parallel to the isobars. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 101.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Atmospheric Pressure is the force per unit area exerted against a surface by the weight of the air above that surface. 2. Ifthe surface Atmospheric Pressure is 1000 Mb then the Air Pressure at 1 km above the surface will be 900 Mb. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 102.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding ionosphere: 1. It is composed of free electrons and positively charged ions. Its size is not fixed. The electron density is higher in the F region than that in the D region of the ionosphere. Which of the above statements are correct?
Question 103.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the thermosphere: 1. Despite here the temperature can rise up to 4500 degrees Fahrenheit there is no convectional heat transfer in this layer. 2. It is home to the International Space Station. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 104.----------------
 Consider the following list: 1. Evaporation 2. Transpiration 3. Condensation 4 Volcanic Eruption Which of the above processes/agent facilitate the redistribution of water across the Planet?
Question 105.----------------
 Match the following: List-I List-I feathery appearance Cloud formed at high altitudes like cotton wool formed at mid altitudes gray clouds Cloud formed very near to the surface covering large portions of the sky Select the correct answer using the code given below: A B C D With reference to the cloud formation and precipitation consider’ the following statements: 1. Condensation takes place only when the temperature of air is below the dew point. 2. Condensation takes place only when the temperature of air is lower than the freezing point. 3. Frost forms on cold surfaces when the dew point is at or below the freezing point. Which correct? of the above statement is/are
Question 106.----------------
 Which of the following pairs regarding types of rainfall is/are correct? 1. Convectional: Rain of short duration 2. Cyclonic: Occurs at polar fronts 3. Orographic: Relief rain Select the correct option using the code given below:
Question 107.----------------
 Which among the following are the factors controlling temperature distribution on the earth? 1. Latitude 2. Longitude Ocean currents 4. Continentality Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 108.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding atmospheric layers: 1. The homosphere is heterosphere. above’ the 2. Unlike ionosphere charged particles are absent in the exosphere. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 109.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Inversion of temperature occurs only in the Troposphere. 2. The inversion ceases to exist once the Sun comes out in the troposphere. 3. Over polar areas a temperature inversion is normal throughout the year. Which of the above statements are correct?
Question 110.----------------
  Which of the following is the reason for the seasons on the Earth? the Sun Earth’s rotation Earth’s sphericity
Question 111.----------------
 Earth’s tilting on its axis  Which of the following statements is/ are correct? 1. The average albedo of the Earth is 30— 35%. 2. Increasing the forest areas decreases the albedo of the Earth. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 112.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Composition of Earth’s atmosphere: 1. The layer where the composition of atmosphere is uniform in terms of three major gases is called homosphere. 2. Water Vapour goes on decreasing towards the pole from equator. 3. Carbon and Oxygen comprise 99% of the total volume of the atmosphere. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 113.----------------
 Consider the following factors: 1 only 1 and 2 only 1 and 3 only 1. Continentality 2. Cloud Cover  Axial tilt of the earth 4. Direction of mountain chains Which of the following factors affect the climate?
Question 114.----------------
 Upper air inversion is of two type’s viz. thermal upper air inversion and mechanical upper air inversion. Which of the following statements is incorrect regarding these? caused by the presence of ozone layer lying between the heights of 15 to 35 km. The mechanical inversion of temperature is caused at higher heights in the atmosphere due to subsidence of air and turbulence. subsidence of air currents is generally associated with the anticyclonic conditions.
Question 115.----------------
 The temperature inversion causes instability in the atmosphere.  Which of the following statement is correct regarding Atmospheric Humidity? freezing point. relative humidity and the rate of cooling. high a slight cooling is required to bring the temperature down below dew point.
Question 116.----------------
 Smog only occurs in large cities and industrial centres. Bergeron-Findeisen process is related to which of the following processes?
Question 117.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Gases in _ the Atmosphere: 1. Oxygen combines with all the elements and is most combustible.Carbon Dioxide is transparent to the incoming shortwave but is capable of trapping long wave solar radiation. 2. Plantsconvert the nitrogen into various usable forms through the process of nitrogen fixation. Which of the following is are correct?
Question 118.----------------
 Consider the following statements about Measles: 1. It is a highly contagious bacterial disease. There is vaccine available for it. Cough Runny nose and Conjunctivitis are its symptoms. Which of the above statements is/are correct regarding Measles?
Question 119.----------------
 White Sea recently seen in news is surrounded by which of the following countries? 1. Russia 2. Norway 3. Finland 4. Sweden Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 120.----------------
 Port of Douala is located in which one of the following country?
Question 121.----------------
 Palani Hills are situated in which among the following states?
Question 122.----------------
 Strait of Gibraltar connects which two water bodies? Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea
Question 123.----------------
 Black Sea and Caspian Sea North Sea and Baltic Sea RRKEEEREREE Which of the following pairs regarding the horizontal distribution of the atmospheric pressure is/are correctly matched? 1. 5°S: Doldrums 2. 30°N: Horse latitude 3. 90°N: Low-Pressure belt Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 124.----------------
 Consider the following list: 1. Easterly Waves 2. West African Disturbance Line 3. Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough 4. Old Frontal Boundary Which of the above list are required for the formation of a tropical cyclone.
Question 125.----------------
 Tropical cyclones differ temperate cycloneinanumber of ways. Regarding this which of the following statements is/are correct? 1. The Temperate Cyclones affect a much larger area as compared to the Tropical cyclone. 2. The Tropical Cyclones move from west to east but Temperate Cyclones move from east to west. 3. The Temperate Cyclones can originate over the land and sea but Tropical Cyclones can originate only over the seas. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 126.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the circulation of planetary winds: 1. The planetary winds deflect according to the Ferrel’s Law. 2. Westerlies blow from Subpolar pressure belts to sub-tropical belts. 3. Polar easterlies blow towards the poles. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 127.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding Jet Stream is/are correct? 1. They are the broad bands of weak wind in the upper levels of the troposphere. 2. The jet stream is the strongest near the Poles. 3. Rossby Waves are the meandering Jet Streams. eNJSCORE vy Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 128.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding local winds of the world is/ are correct? 1. Foehn igs a warm wind whereas Chinook is a cold wind. 2. Sirocco is a Mediterranean wind causing cool wet weather in Europe. 3. Zonda is a hot wind of the Andes. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 129.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding katabatic wind: 1. Any wind blowing up a steep incline or mountain is a katabatic wind. Katabatic winds flow during nights. 3. Bora is katabatic wind. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 130.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Atmospheric circulation is dominated by two major features viz. Hadley cell and the jet stream. 2. Clouds of the tropical region do not shift into the sub-tropical region. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 131.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1 only 2 only Both 1 and 2 Neither 1 nor 2 1. A dry warm summer with offshore trade winds. 2. Rainfall in winter with on-shore westerlies.  The climate is best suitable for wine production and orchard farming. Which of the following climate type best suits the above characteristics?
Question 132.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Thecooltemperate western marginsare under the influence of the Westerlies all-round the year. 2. They are the regions of frontal cyclonic activity. 3. Itis also called a North-West European Maritime Climate due to greater oceanic influence. Which of the following climate type best describes the above characteristics?
Question 133.----------------
 Which of the following statements is/ are correct about ‘humidity’? 1. The actual amount of water vapor present in the atmosphere is known as relative humidity and expressed as grams per cubic meter. 2. The ability to hold moisture by air depends on the temperature. 3. Relative humidity is greater over continents compared to oceans. Select the correct answer using the given below:
Question 134.----------------
 1 only 2 only Deserts can be formed due to__ 1. Continentality 2. Off-shore Trade Winds 3. Warm Ocean currents Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 135.----------------
 Which of the following is the characteristic feature of the Sudan Type of Climate? rainfall with high temperature throughout the year. The trade winds in the region bring rain to the coastal districts. the region which increases the rate of evaporation. None
Question 136.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding the tropical cyclone is/are incorrect? 1. Eye is the center of the cyclone where torrential rainfall occurs. 2. Eyewallis a region of strong ascending air up to the tropopause. 3. The eye can grow or shrink in size. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 137.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Tsunamis: 1. Tsunamis are not tidal waves. 2. They strike generally in the winters. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 138.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1 only 2 only 1. Generally there is an _ inverse relationship between air temperature and air pressure. 2. The oceans are associated with low pressure in winter and high pressure in summer. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 139.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Wind: 1 only 2 only 1. The equator ward part of the trade wind is humid. 2. Westerlies wind are more stronger in the northern hemisphere as compared to the southern hemisphere. Which of the following statement is/are incorrect?
Question 140.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Laurentian type of climate: 1. It is an intermediate type of climate between the British and the Siberian type of climate. eNJSCORE rE 2. Laurentian type of climate is found only in two regions in the world. 3. This type of climate is absent in Northern Hemisphere. 4. Oak beech maple and birch are the principal trees north of the 50°N latitude. Which of the following is/are correct?
Question 141.----------------
 The atmospheric circulation is driven by the rotation of the earth and the incoming energy from the sun. Which of the following statements related to it is/are incorrect? 1. The doldrums lies at the Tropic of Cancer as well as Tropic of Capricorn. 2. Subtropical Jet Streams are always easterlies and Tropical Jet Streams are always westerlies.  The energy at the Ferrel cell is provided by the polar and Hadley cells circulating on either side. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 142.----------------
  Which of the following statements is correct regarding Thunderstorms and Tornadoes? Both are violent storms occurring over a small area but for a short duration. If there is insufficient moisture a Tornado can generate dust storms. Thunderstorms over the sea are called water sprouts.
Question 143.----------------
 Thunderstorms are caused by intense convection on dry hot days. today in which of the north-eastern states? Arunachal Pradesh Nagaland Mizoram Assam Sikkim oF we Ny Choose the correct option from the given options
Question 144.----------------
 Consider the following statements about bodos tribe that was in news recently: 1. Bodos are the single largest tribal community in Assam making up over 5-6 per cent of the state’s population. 2. Bodos demand to create a separate state of Bodoland correct?
Question 145.----------------
 Union Home ministry has introduced a bill for the merger of Union Territories of Dadra and Nagar Havelli and Daman and Diu recently in the Parliament. What are the main reasons behind this move? 1. Both UTs have ' two _— separate constitutional and administrative bodies which lead to a lot of duplicacy inefficiency and wasteful expenditure. 2. The merger will help in achieving the government’s goal to have Minimum 3. Both of them have small population and limited geographical area so the the services of officers will be used efficiently. 4. Both have same language and  What are the implications of ongoing ethinicity. US-China trade war? Choose the coreet answer? 1. Sharp decline in bilateral trade
Question 146.----------------
 BRKREREEEEREER Which of the following statements regarding the abyssal plain is /are correct? 1. These are underwater plains on the deep ocean floor with rich biodiversity. 2. These are the result of seafloor spreading. 3. These are featureless and flat region of the Ocean. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 147.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding oceanic reliefs: 1. Continental Margin is a part of an ocean. 2. Deep-sea trenches are formed at the continent margin.  Mid-Oceanic Ridges are the longest mountain ranges on the earth. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 148.----------------
 Which of the following statements is/ are correct? 1. A shoal is a detached elevation with shallow depths. 2. A submarine canyon can extend up to the mouth of the rivers. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 149.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the storm surge: 1. Storm Surge is the abnormal rise in the astronomical tide. 2. It occurs during the Solar eclipse. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 150.----------------
 Wich of the following reliefs is not situated in the Indian Ocean?
Question 151.----------------
 Which of the following is the correct sequence of the terrigenous deposits from the coast to the deeper part of the sea? 1. Clay 2. Mud 3. Sand 4. Silt Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 152.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding Pelagic Deposits are correct? 1. Pelagic deposits cover about three- fourths of the total seafloor. 2. Ooze is the organic material of the Pelagic Deposits. 3. It is made up of calcium carbonate only. 4 The inorganic material i.e. Red clay is the most widely spread pelagic deposit. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 153.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the marginal seas: 1. Sargasso Sea is the only marginal sea which does not touch any land. 2. Persian Gulf is not a marginal sea. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 154.----------------
 Which of the following pairs regarding the primary causes of the oceanic circulation is/are correctly matched? 1. Waves: Friction 2. Tides: Gravity 3. Currents: Wind Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 155.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding ocean gyres is correct? 1. A gyre is a rotating ocean currents. 2. Turtle Gyre is formed in the Atlantic ocean. 3. Beaufort gyre found in the Arctic Ocean. Select the correct option using the codes given below.
Question 156.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding ocean currents: 1. The effect of winds is more pronounced in the Indian Ocean than that in the Pacific or Atlantic Oceans. 2. Agulhas current is a warm current whereas the Mozambique current is cold. 8. Antilles Current is a cold current in the South Indian Ocean. 4. Grand Banks which is the richest fishing grounds on Earth is due to the confluence of the Kuroshio and Oyashio Currents. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 157.----------------
 Arrange the following water bodies into increasing order of salinity: 1. Bay Of Bengal 2. Arabian Sea 3. Mediterranean Sea 4. Dead Sea Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 158.----------------
  Which of the following statements regarding tides are correct? 1. The time between the high tide and low tide when the water level is falling is called the ebb. 2. The time between the low tide and high tide when the tide is rising is called the flood. 3. When a tide enters the narrow and shallow estuary of a river or the gulfs it forms tidal bore. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 159.----------------
  Which of the following statements is/ are correct about the temperature distribution over the oceans? 1. Isotherms are more regular and follow latitudes in the northern hemisphere as compared to the southern hemisphere. 2. Offshore winds drive warm surface water away from the coast resulting in the upwelling of the cold water. 3. The enclosed seas in lower latitudes have higher temperatures as compared to the open seas because of the landmass. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 160.----------------
 Consider the following statements about the groundwater resource: 1. Areas containing permeable rocks and with a good amount of rainfall have sufficient groundwater storage. 2. Deccan lava region of India has one of the highest underground water reserves. 3. The permeable rock in which water is stored is called an aquifer. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 161.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the division of ocean: 1. The average width of the continental shelf is about 70 km and mean slope is less than one degree. 2. Continental slope is steeper than the shelf and it marks the boundary between continental crust and oceanic crust. 3. The abyssal plains are present in all major oceans and several seas of the world. Which of the following is/are correct?
Question 162.----------------
 1 and 2 only 2 and 3 only  Which of the following affect the salinity of the ocean? 1. North East Trade Winds 2. West Australian Current 3. Flow of Danube into Black Sea Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
Question 163.----------------
  Which of the following statements is correct regarding Tides? are in a straight line they are called it is called Neap tide SY angles to each other it is called Spring tide one high tide and two low tide during each day.
Question 164.----------------
 During the Semi-diurnal tide there are two high tides and two low tides each day. Consider the following pairs: Ocean Current Feature Counterpart of the Canaries Current 1. Benguela Current One branch turns south as the warm Brazilian Current 2. South Equatorial Current 3. East Greenland Current Flows between Iceland and Greenland Which of the following is/are correctly matched?
Question 165.----------------
 Materials eroded from the earth which are not deposited by rivers or at the coast are eventually dropped on the ocean floor. Which of the following statement is incorrect regarding the Oceanic Deposits of the Ocean Floor? they are derived from land and are mainly deposited on the continental “Chicago Convention” seen recently in news is related to? Regulating international air travel Convention on Climate change Regulating Terrorism and related activities
Question 166.----------------
 India’s first hybrid annuity model is been recently established in which state?
Question 167.----------------
 Recently there was volcanic eruption in White Island in which country is this island located?
Question 168.----------------
 ‘Frogphone’ was in news recently is monitor frogs in the wild. features.
Question 169.----------------
 reproduction Which of the following activities can be said to be a cause of climate change? 1. Land degradation shelves. 2 Industrial heat are derived from the oceans Choose the correct answer: biological content.
Question 170.----------------
 BRERKEEEKRERE es Consider the following pairs with reference to the formation of the Himalayas: 1. Greater Himalayas: Pliocene 2. Lesser Himalayas: Miocene 3. Outer Himalayas: Eocene Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 171.----------------
 Consider the following faults of the Himalayas: 1. Main Central Thrust 2. Himalayan Frontal Thrust 3. Main Boundary Thrust Arrange the above faults in north-south direction:
Question 172.----------------
 Which of the following pairs is/are incorrectly matched? 1. Dhupgarh: Vindhyan range 2. Amarkantak: Satpura range 3. Gali Konda: Palkodna range Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 173.----------------
 Which of the following are the importance of the Himalayas for India? 1. It shapes the climate of India. 2. It contains rich mineral resources including Anthracite coal. 3. It has great tourism potential. 4. Temperate grasslands are found here. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 174.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. The Himalayas have been formed due to compression of a geo-syncline Tethys Sea. 2. Chos are the longitudinal valleys in the Shivalik range. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 175.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding Shiwalik Range is/are incorrect? 1. Shiwalik Range is not found in the Eastern Himalayas. It is called Nag Tibba in Uttarakhand. Zaskar and Ladakh are in the Greater Himalayas. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 176.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. The basin of the Kashmir Valley was formed by the tectonic upliftment of Great Himalayas Range. 2. The ‘Karewas’ of Kashmir are both lacustrine and fluvial deposits. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 177.----------------
 Arrange the following countries into the decreasing order of the length of border with India: 1. Pakistan 2. Nepal 3. Myanmar 4. Bhutan Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 178.----------------
 Which of the following pairs regarding the rock system in India is correctly matched? 1. Dravidian Rock System: Himalayas rock 2. Gondwana System: Earliest system of India  Dharwar Rocks: Found in Aravali and Chota Nagpur regions. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 179.----------------
 Consider the following statements related to the Northern plains of India: 1. The alluvial fertile plains formed by the deposition process of the Himalayan Rivers only. 2. The Delta plains are considered as the extension of Khadar land.  The Bhabar Plains is in the north of Shiwalik whereas Terai region is in the south. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 180.----------------
 Arrange the following passes of the peninsular India in the North-South direction: 1. Goram Ghat 2. Haldi Ghati 3. Chorla Ghat 4. Bhor Ghat Select the correct answer from the options given below:
Question 181.----------------
 Arrange the following passes of the Himalayas in the East-West direction: 1. Tunga Pass 2. Bom DiLa 3. Bum La 4 Dipher Pass Select the correct answer from the options given below:
Question 182.----------------
 Unlike the Western Coast Eastern Coast does not have natural ports due to which of the following reasons? 1. Eastern Coast receives less rainfall than the West Coast. 2. The entire coastlines of the West Coast are the Coastline of Submergence. 3. The west-flowing rivers do not form delta. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 183.----------------
 Match the following lists of the riverine islands to their locations: River islands Location Select the correct answer from the code given below the lists: A B Cc OD © 2 38 1 4 d@) 2 4 #1 8 Consider the following statements regarding islands of India: 1. Like Lakshadweep Andaman and Nicobar island groups have been formed due to coral deposits. 2. Nicobar island group has a larger number of islands than the Andaman group. 3. New Moore island emerged in the Bay of Bengal in the aftermath of the Bhola cyclone in 19 Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 184.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: 1. Nathu-La pass: Sikkim 2. Burjila pass: Jammu and Kashmir 3. Shipki-La: Himanchal Pradesh 4. Zoji-La: Arunanchal Pradesh Which of the following pairs are correctly matched?
Question 185.----------------
  Which of the following statements is/ are incorrect regarding the Himalayan Mountains? of the world. Dehra Dun is situated in the Himadari Range. The famous hill station of Chakrata exists in the Lesser Himalayas. Bara Lacha-La Shipki-La Nathu-La Zoji-La Bomidi-La are present in the Himadari range.
Question 186.----------------
  Which of the following statements is/ are correct regarding the Western and Eastern Ghats? 1. The highest peak in Western Ghats region is Mahendragiri. 2. Shiva Samudram falls is in the Eastern Ghat region. 3. The Eastern Ghat is drained by the Mahanadi Godawari Krishna and Kaveri river systems. Select the correct option form the codes given below:
Question 187.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Coastal Plains: 1. The formation of deltas is prominent in the Eastern Ghats. 2. Vembanad is famous lagoon which is located at Malabar Coast Which of the following is/are correct?
Question 188.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Islands: 1. Andaman and Nicobar isthe only island in India having an active volcano. 2. Lakshdweep is the only Island in India having coral presence. Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 189.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Gangetic river dolphin 1. The Gangetic river dolphins can only live in freshwater 2. They are one of the oldest creatures in the world along with some species of turtles 3. It is placed under the “critically endangered” category by the International Union for Conservation Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 190.----------------
  Which Indian state recently got its first SEZ?
Question 191.----------------
 D Prabhakaran committee was seen recently in news what was the purpose of this committee? It suggested reforms in electrification of Indian Railways It suggested resolving ambiguities on the correct serving size of packed and fast foods and the exact nutritional information. sector
Question 192.----------------
 nationwide NRC conducting the The term ‘Yazidis’ was often in news in reference to the conflict and civil war in West Asia. Which of the following statements are correct about Yazidis? 1. Yazidis are an endogamous mostly Kurmanji-speaking group. 2. Yazidi practices have roots tracing back to the ancient Egyptian civilization. 3. Yazidi practices have mixed elements of Christianity Islam and Zoroastrianism. Choose the correct answer:
Question 193.----------------
 ‘Jaga Mission’ received the 2019 World Habitat Award. Which of the following statements are correct about Jaga Mission? 1. Jaga Mission is a Housing & Urban Development Department of Government of Odisha project. 2. Jaga Mission aims to transform Urban habitats. 3. Jaga Mission also provides access to livelihood opportunities. Choose the correct answer:
Question 194.----------------
 1 only 1 and 3 only 1. Which of the following events have shaped the evolution of the drainage pattern of the Peninsular rivers? 1. Upliftment of the Himalayas in the tertiary period. 2. Downwarping of western flank of the Western Ghats. 3. Slight tilting of the Peninsular block. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 195.----------------
 2. Which of the following are the reasons for the shifting of the Himalayan region? 1. River Capture 2. Floods 3. Gentle slope of the Northern plains. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 196.----------------
 proposed interlinking of Manas Sankosh Teesta and Ganga Rivers? 1. Diversion of the surplus waters of Ganga to Manas and Sankosh rivers. 2. Transfer of the surplus water to the water-deficient peninsular rivers. 3. Providing irrigation facilities to the enroute command areas. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 197.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: 2. Mettur Dam: Kaveri river 3. dog falls: Narmada river Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 198.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding a river: 1. It is a perennial trans-boundary river originating on the Tibetan Plateau near Manasarovar lake. It is the longest river in Nepal. Its tributary is a river which forms the Indo-Nepal border. Which of the following rivers these statements are about?
Question 199.----------------
 6. Which of the following rivers is/are 1. Amaravati 2. Periyar 3. Noyyal 4. Harangi Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 200.----------------
 Arrange the following list of tributaries of the Brahmaputra river in the East- West direction: 1. Manas 2. Sankosh 3. Subansiri 4 Lohit Select the correct order using the codes given below:
Question 201.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding peninsular rivers: 1. All the peninsular rivers are non- perennial in nature. 2. All the peninsular rivers are fed by rain only. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 202.----------------
 Tehri dam India’s highest dam has been built on which of the following rivers?
Question 203.----------------
  Which of the following pairs regarding rivers and the cities on the rivers is/ are correctly matched? 1. Narmada: Jabalpur 2. Mahanadi: Bhuvneshwar 3. Kaveri: Chennai 4. Ghaghra: Ayodhya Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 204.----------------
 Consider the following pairs of the rivers and their tributaries: 1. Yamuna: Tons 2. Jamuna: Tista 3. Ken: Betwa Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 205.----------------
  West flowing rivers do not form delta due to which of the following reasons? 1. Collision between Indian and Eurasian plates. Shorter course of the rivers. Steeper slope of their course. Smaller tributaries of these rivers. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 206.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Narmada river: 1. It rises from the Maikala range. 2. Sahasradhara Falls is situated on the river. It flows through the marble rocks. Aliabet is the largest island made by the river. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 207.----------------
 Consider the following rivers: 1. Gomti Beas Jhelum Barak Mahananda of © only?
Question 208.----------------
 Consider the following Himalayan rivers: 1. Jhelum 2. Chenab 8. Ravi 4 Beas 5. Satluj in India?
Question 209.----------------
  Consider the following statements regarding the rivers system in India: 1. The Himalayan rivers intensive erosional activity in their upper courses and carry huge loads of silt and sand. All the peninsular rivers are seasonal. The Peninsular Rivers have shorter and deeper courses as compared to their Himalayan counterparts. Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 210.----------------
 . Consider the following statements regarding the Indus River: water level is at its lowest from mid December to mid-February. the Indus River system is at a minimum during the summer months. system are snow-fed
Question 211.----------------
 through Tibet. . Consider the following rivers: 1. Subansiri 2. Dhansiri 3. Manas 4. Barak Which of the following is not a right bank tributary of Brahmaputra?
Question 212.----------------
 . From which of the following states does the Narmada river does not pass?
Question 213.----------------
  Which of the following rivers does not meet the sea at the Gulf of Khambhat?
Question 214.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Annular Solar Eclipse 1. An eclipse happens when the moon while orbiting the Earth comes in between the sun and the Earth. 2. Solar eclipses can be used to study the top layer of the sun called the corona. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 215.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Bushfire that has caused a devastating fire in Australia 1. It is an uncontrolled fire that burns through scrubland. 2. Wind plays a key part in the spread of bushfires. 3. Eucalyptus trees were the major factor for the fire. . What are the major causes for winter getting extra cold in India? 1. The cold wave usually arrives from the west through the Western Disturbance wind system. 2. Extended cold spell has been triggered due to low stratus clouds that are blanketed over a large geographical area. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 216.----------------
  With reference to Swachh Survekshan 2020 consider the statements following 1. It is a biennial survey of cleanliness hygiene and sanitation in cities and towns across India. 2. The surveys are carried out by Quality Council of India. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 217.----------------
 Which of the following statement is/are  Exercise INDRA 2019 was held between correct? which countries recently
Question 218.----------------
 RRKERERERE Consider the following factors: 1. Latitude 2. Distance from the Sea 3. Distribution of Land and Water Which of the above factors influence the Indian Climate?
Question 219.----------------
 Which of the following climatic regions are found in India? 1. Steppe climate 2. Tropical Savannah 3. Monsoon with dry summer 4. Monsoon with dry winter Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 220.----------------
 October and November are _ the rainiest months of the year in Tamil Nadu. Which of the following is/are the 1. North-East Monsoon 2. Retreating South-West Monsoon 3. Western Disturbances Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 221.----------------
 Which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched? 1. Norwesters: Pre-Monsoon raining 2. October Heat: Retreating Monsoon Post-Monsoon 3. Blossom shower: raining Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 222.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. A negative Southern Oscillation Index is good for the Indian Monsoon. 2. During La Nina the walker cell over the Pacific Ocean shifts to the central regions of the Pacific Ocean from the western Pacific region. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 223.----------------
 Despite there is good sun’s insolation from March to May the South-West monsoon does not occur. Which of the 1. ITCZ is still south of the Equator in these months. 2. Sub Tropical Jet stream blows north of the Himalayas in these months. 3. There is a strong divergence in the upper atmosphere over India. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 224.----------------
 Which of the following pairs regarding the types of traditional Indian seasons is/are correctly matched? 1. Sharada: September-October 2. Hemanta: January-February 3. Vasanta: February-March Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 225.----------------
 heatwaves in India? 1. The northward movement of the Sun in summers. 2. Anti-cyclonic conditions in the Bay of Bengal. 3. A sudden increase in atmospheric pressure in the interiors of the country. 4. Frequent El-Nino. Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 226.----------------
 Which of the following experiments for the study of Monsoon was carried out exclusively by India?
Question 227.----------------
 The term El Nino refers to the large- scale ocean-atmosphere climate interaction linked to periodic warming in sea surface temperatures across the central and east-central Equatorial Pacific. Consider the following statements regarding El Nino: 1. During the El Nino the Peruvian coast witness cold currents in place of usual warm currents of normal years. 2. During the El Nino the South American coast witnesses a good amount of rainfall. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 228.----------------
 Which of the following are the postulates of the modern theory of the origin of the Monsoon in India? 1. Migration of the Sub-Tropical Jet stream southward. 2. Origin of the Jetstream. Tropical Easterly  Influence of the Polar Jetstream. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 229.----------------
 Which of the following is/are not the features of the Monsoon Rainfall in India? 1. Spatial distribution of rainfallis largely governed by relief or topography. 2. Breaks in the Monsoon rainfall are related to the cyclonic depressions Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 230.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Somali Jet and the Indian Ocean Dipole: 1. Indian Ocean Dipole is good for the Indian Monsoon. 2. The onset of the southwest monsoon is coincided with the onset of the Warm Somali Current. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 231.----------------
  Which of the following are the factors responsible for the formation/ strengthening of North-East Monsoon? 1. Formation of high-pressure cells over Tibetan plateau in winter. 2. Weakening of the Walker Cell in the Southern Indian Ocean. 3. Migration of ITCZ to the south of the Equator. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 232.----------------
  Why Tamil Nadu coast remains dry during the South-West Monsoon season. 1. It is parallel to the Bay of Bengal branch of the South-West monsoon. 2. No moisture-laden South-West Monsoon wind reach in Tamil Nadu. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 233.----------------
 Consider the following regions: Malabar Coast Western Ghats Eastern Ghats Northern Assam oom ft NM Lakshadweep The tropical wet monsoon climate occurs in which of the following regions of India?
Question 234.----------------
 The southwest monsoon arrives in two branches: the Bay of Bengal branch and the Arabian Sea branch. Regarding the above statement consider the following: 1. The Arabian Sea branch is much more stronger than the Bay of Bengal branch. 2. The Bay of Bengal branch is responsible for much of the rainfall in the northwest. 3. South India receives more rainfall than North India. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 235.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. During the winter season the westerly jet streams sets in on the south of the iz Himalayas due to the shift of the ITCZ southward. 2. The eastern Himalayan region does not get rainfall from the north east monsoon. Which of the following is/are incorrect?
Question 236.----------------
  Which of the following factors affect the monsoon of India? 1. Phinlander jet 2. Subtropical westerly jet stream  Tibet Plateau 4. Subtropical easterly jet Select the correct option from the codes given below:
Question 237.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding causes of monsoon: 1. There is a negative correlation between Tibetan snow cover and Indian summer 2. The stronger the effect of El-Nino the stronger the monsoon will be in Australia. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 238.----------------
 are the latest addition to Geographical 1. Palani Panchamirtham from Tamil Nadu 2. Tawlhlohpuan and MizoPuanchei from the state of Mizoram 8. Tirur Betel leaf from Kerala 4. Saffron from Kashmir Choose the correct answer
Question 239.----------------
 Consider the following statements about the Global Refugee Forum was held in Geneva Switzerland jointly hosted by the United Nations High the United Nations Refugee Agency and the Government of Switzerland. 2. The Global Refugee Forum is an opportunity to translate the principle of international responsibility-sharing into concrete action. correct?
Question 240.----------------
 Which of the following offered to Arabs across the Middle East right to self-rule in exchange for their aid in defeating the Ottoman Empire? Choose the correct answer:
Question 241.----------------
 Operation Twist was in news recently. What is Operation Twist? Choose the correct answer: bank Syria
Question 242.----------------
 concerns Indians have lately been facing issues related to H-1B visas. Which of the following statements are correct about H-1B visas? 1. H-1Bis a United States visa of which India is currently the majority holder. H-1B is an immigrant visa. H-1B allows US companies to employ Indian workers in “specialty occupations”. Choose the correct answer:
Question 243.----------------
 REKREKEREERE On which of the following cities the Mid-day Sun is overhead twice a year? Aizwal Agartala Bhopal Ranchi Nagpur of © NP Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 244.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: 1. Eight-degree channel: Separates Amindivi islands from Cannanore Islands. 2. Nine-degree channel: separates Minicoy from rest of the Lakshadweep  Coco channel: Separates Little Andaman from South Andaman 4 Eleven-degree channel: Separates Maldives from Lakshadweep Which of the above pairs is/are incorrect?
Question 245.----------------
 Which ofthe following pairs is correctly matched? 1. Bass Strait: separates Tasmania from the New Zealand 2. Cook strait: Separates the North and South Islands of New Zealand 3. Torres Strait: Separates Australia from New Guinea Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 246.----------------
 Which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched? 1. Longest strait: Strait of Malacca 2. Widest strait: Bosphorus Strait 3. Narrowest strait: Denmark Strait Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 247.----------------
 Arrange the following Seas in the North-South Direction: 1. Sulu Sea 2. Banda Sea 3. Celebes Sea 4. Cream Sea Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 248.----------------
 6. Which of the following lakes is not present in Australia?
Question 249.----------------
 7. Consider the following pairs regarding States of Australia and their Capitals: 1. New South Wales: Melbourne 2. Victoria: Sydney 3. Tasmania: Hobart 4. Queensland: Brisbane Which of the above pairs are correctly matched?
Question 250.----------------
 8. Consider the following statements regarding the Jordan River: 1. It flows from Lebanon to Jordan. 2. It ends its run on to the Sea of Galilee. 3. West Bank got its name from the River. Which of the above statements are correct?
Question 251.----------------
 9. Through which of the following countries the Tropic of Capricorn is not passed?
Question 252.----------------
  Which of the following connects the Sea of Azov with the Black Sea?
Question 253.----------------
  Arrange the following cities in the North-South direction: 1. Manama 2. Muscat  Abu Dhabi 4. Doha Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 254.----------------
  Which of the following two water bodies are separated by the Isthmus of Kra? Mottama Sea
Question 255.----------------
 Sea Consider the following statements regarding mountain peaks: 1. Lhotse is the fourth highest peak in the world. 2. Mount Kinabalu is the highest peak in the South-East Asian region. 3. Mount Vinson is the highest peak in Antarctica. 4. Gunnbjorn Fyjeld is the highest peak in the Arctic region. Which of the above statements are correct?
Question 256.----------------
  Which of the following groups forms the ‘Lithium Triangle’?
Question 257.----------------
 The southernmost city of the world is Puerto Williams. It has replaced which of the following cities to achieve this status?
Question 258.----------------
 If a person has to travel from Aizwal to Jamnagar what is the minimum number of states that s/he has to set foot in including the states from where s/he is starting and finishing?
Question 259.----------------
 Ross Island which has recently been named as Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Dweep is situated in which part of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands?
Question 260.----------------
 Consider the following Island Nations of Pacific Ocean: 1. Tonga 2. Marshall Islands 3. Tuvalu 4. Kiribati Arrange the following nations in North to South order and select the correct option from the codes given below:
Question 261.----------------
 Consider the following seas: 1. Caspian sea 2. Aral sea 3. Black sea 4. Mediterranean sea Arrange the following from west to east and choose the correct option from the codes given below:
Question 262.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the geography of India: 1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with both Thailand and Indonesia. 2. Indian Standard Meridian it passes through Mirzapur in Uttar Pradesh and touches six states of India. 3. Drass in western Ladakh is the coldest place in the world. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 263.----------------
 With reference to “The Impossible Row” project consider the following statements 1. The project is related to the Drake Passage. 2. The Passage is located between Cape Horn at the tip of South America and the Antarctic Peninsula. 3. This is the first completely human- powered crossing of the passage. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 264.----------------
 World’s oldest rhino recently died in which country?
Question 265.----------------
 The Cabinet recently decided to merge all central service cadres of Railways officers into a single Indian Railways of the following statements are true about IRMS? 1. IRMS will merge nine Group A services 2. Wadwa committee in 2015 has noted that “departmentalism” is a major problem in the Railway system and recommended merging of all services into one. Choose the correct answer:
Question 266.----------------
 Consider the following statements about Drake Passage- 1. It is the body of water between South America’s Cape Horn and the South Shetland Islands of Antarctica. 2. There is no significant land anywhere around the world at the latitudes of Drake Passage. Which of the following statements above is/ are correct?
Question 267.----------------
 1 only 2 only Both 1 and 2 Neither 1 nor 2 Consider the following statements about the e-Bkry e-auction portal- 1. It has been recently launched by Ministry of Commerce. 2. It is framework for promoting online auction of assets attached by the banks. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 268.----------------
 REKREEREREE Consider the following statements regarding the Malthusian Theory of Population. 1. While the food supply increases in geometrical progression the population increases in arithmetical progression. 2. It violates the law of diminishing returns. 3. Thetheorytakes account ofthescientific and technological advancements. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 269.----------------
 Which of the following pairs regarding spices and their largest producers is/ are correctly matched? 2. Turmeric: Andhra Pradesh 3. Chilli: Karnataka Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 270.----------------
 Which of the following tribes are found in the Union Territory of Ladakh? 1. Drokpa 2. Bora 3. Beda 4. Bot Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 271.----------------
 Which ofthe following are the mandates of the UN Population Fund? 1. Reproductive health 2. Gender equality  Population and development Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 272.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding approaches to Human Development: 1. Welfare Approach was propounded by Amartya Sen. 2. Basic Needs Approach was proposed by the International Labour Organisation. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 273.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. In the areas of extensive agriculture per worker productivity is high whereas in the areas of intensive agriculture per hectare productivity is high. 2. Crop Intensity of a country cannot exceed 100%. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 274.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding Double-Cropping Agriculture is/are correct? 1. Double-Cropping Agriculture practice involves the cultivation of two crops simultaneously. 2. It is prevalent in those areas where there is inadequate rainfall. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 275.----------------
 Consider the following pairs regarding Specialized Cultivations: 1. Silviculture: Honey production 2. Moriculture: Silk production 3. Mariculture: Forest management Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 276.----------------
 Arrange the following states into the increasing order of on-shore oil production? 1. Gujarat 2. Assam 8. Andhra Pradesh 4. Rajasthan Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 277.----------------
 Which of the following pairs regarding types of agriculture and their main region/countries are correct? 1. Intensive Subsistence Agriculture: Monsoon Climate 2. Extensive Commercial Grain Cultivation: Steppe Climate 3. Dairy Farming: Tropical Climate 4 Viticulture: Mediterranean region Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 278.----------------
 Arrange the following list of renewable resources according to the decreasing order of their cost per MW production in India: 1. Geothermal 2. Solar Thermal 3. Solar PV 4. Hydro Select the correct option using codes given below:
Question 279.----------------
 Consider the following hydropower stations: 1. Nimmo-Bazgo 2. Rangit 3. Dulhasti 4. Chutak Which of the following hydropower stations is/are situated in the Union Territory of Ladakh?
Question 280.----------------
 2 and 3 only 1 and 4 only 1 3 and 4 only 1 23 and 4  Which of the following statements is/ are incorrect regarding Biogas? 1. Biogas typically refers to a mixture of different gases produced by the breakdown of organic matter in the presence of oxygen. Biogas. 3. Biogas can be compressed the same way natural gas is compressed to CNG. Select the correct answer using the code given below.
Question 281.----------------
  Which of the following pairs are correctly matched? Nuclear Plants: States 1. Kaiga: Karnataka 2. Chutka: Gujarat 3. Kalpakkam: Tamil Nadu 4. Kovvada: Andhra Pradesh Select the correct answer using the code given below.
Question 282.----------------
  Which of the following statements is/ are correct regarding Thoriumvis-a- vis Uranium as a fuel? 1. Thorium is efficient than Uranium. more 2. Uranium is fertile rather than fissile whereas Thorium is both fertile and fissile. 3. Thorium is more abundant in nature. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 283.----------------
 Consider the following pairs regarding the Nuclear Power plants and their location: 1. Kakrapara: Maharashtra 2. Kudankulam: Karnataka 3. Kalpakam: Tamil Nadu Which of the following is/are incorrectly matched?
Question 284.----------------
 Global uranium production increased by 40% between 2004 and 2013 mainly because of increased production by Kazakhstan the world’s leading producer. reactors) under construction are located in three countries. Which one of the following is not one of them? China Russia Kazakhstan USA India oe oO NP Select the correct option from the codes given below:
Question 285.----------------
 Which of the following statements is incorrect regarding Shale Gas? trapped within shale formations. Shales are fine-grained igneous rocks that can be rich sources of petroleum and natural gas. maximum potential for shale gas production.
Question 286.----------------
 Shale gas drilling is associated with water supply issue. Consider the following sources of renewable energy: 1. Small hydropower Bioenergy Geothermal power Solar power oe & Wind power Arrange the following in the decreasing order of their consumption in the world.
Question 287.----------------
 China is the major producer of cotton and is also the world’s largest cotton consumer and importer. Consider the following statements regarding the above: 1. Xinjiang has become the largest cotton producing area in China. 2. All agriculture in Xinjiang depends on irrigation. 3. A mulched drip irrigation technique has been proven a great success in the production of cotton in water deprived areas. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 288.----------------
 Rotavac 5D an oral rotavirus vaccine which was currently been developed. With respect to that consider the following statements regarding it 1. Hyderabad-based Bharat Biotech International has commercially launched it. 2. The roll-out of oral rotavirus vaccine is also the lowest dose-volume rotavirus vaccine in the world. 3. Rotavirus is the most common cause of severe diarrhea among infants and children throughout the world. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 289.----------------
 The 2019 United Nations Climate Change Conference also known as COP25 is been held at which place? With reference to NATO consider the following statements 1. India is the founding member of NATO 2. Each member designates ambassador to NATO. 3. NATO’s primary purpose was_ to defend member nations from threats by communist countries. an Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 290.----------------
  India’s first hybrid annuity model Plant is been inaugurated in which state?
Question 291.----------------
  Which constitutional amendment provided 10% reservation in government jobs and_ educational institutions for the “economically backward” in the unreserved category?
Question 292.----------------
 REKREEEEREE Which of the following pairs regarding ore/minerals of elements is/are correctly matched? 1. Pitchblende: Uranium 2. Coffinite: Thorium 3. Wolframite: Tungsten Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 293.----------------
 Which of the following is the biggest coal mine in the world?
Question 294.----------------
 Arrange the following states into increasing order of the _ graphite reserves in India: 1. Arunachal Pradesh 2. Jharkhand 3. Odisha 4. Tamil Nadu Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 295.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Apatites are the most common source of Phosphate. Phosphorites are the rock phosphate. Apatites can be igneous metamorphic or sedimentary rocks. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 296.----------------
 What is/are the uses of the foundry industry? 1. Infrastructure development 2. Farm machinery products productions 3. Textile industry Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 297.----------------
 Consider the following pairs: Zones: Headquarters 1. North Frontier Railway: Siliguri 2. North Eastern Railway: Guwahati 3. South Central Railway: Secunderabad 4. North Western Railway: Jaipur Which of the above pair are incorrectly
Question 298.----------------
 Consider the following pairs regarding Steel Companies in Public Sector and their locations: 1 2 and 3 only 2 and 3 only 1. Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd: Visakhapatnam Steel Authority of India Ltd: Burnpur 3. National Mineral Development Corporation: Bastar Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 299.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding cement industry: 1. Cement is produced by the process known as Smelting. 2. India is the second-largest producer of cement in the world. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 300.----------------
 Consider the following pairs regarding types of glasses and their compositions: 1. Soda glass: Sodium carbonate 2. Pyrex glass: Boron trioxide 3. Flint Glass: Potassium carbonate Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 301.----------------
 Match the following lists: List-I List-IT Select the correct answer from the codes given below the lists: A B C D @) 4 1 2 8 Which of the following National Highways is not included in the Golden Quadrilateral?
Question 302.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding the Cotton Textile Industry in India is/are correct? 1. India is the largest producer of both yarn and textile. India is the second-largest exporter. 3. It is the largest consumer of cotton textiles. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 303.----------------
 Pipelineinfrastructureisaneconomical and safe mode of transportation. Consider the following statements in this regard: 1. Jagdishpur-Haldia-Bokaro-Dhamra by GAIL under the Pradhan Mantri Urja Ganga Project. is being constructed by Petroleum Conservation Research Association Gas Grid. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 304.----------------
 14 Which among the following statements regarding greenfield § airport is correct? 1. Greenfield airports are such airports which are built on the previous used lands to cut carbon emission. 2. Rajeev Gandhi International Airport Hyderabad is the first greenfield airport in Asia. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 305.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding solar power generation in India: 1. Indiais now producing world’s cheapest solar power. 2. India is the world’s second-largest producer of the solar power after China. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 306.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Census of India: 1. Census 2011 is the only source of primary data at village town and ward level. 2. The decadal growth rate of 2001-2011 period was less than that of the 1991- 2001 period. 3. While Uttar Pradesh is the most populous among the state Bihar is the state with highest density. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 307.----------------
 Mesabi Range in USA Quebec in Canada Normandy in France etc. are famous for which of the following mineral?
Question 308.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Fish production in India: 1. Indiais the second largest fish producer in the world. 2. India is the largest producer of inland fish in the world. 3. Marine fishing in India is more on the West Coast than the East Coast. Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 309.----------------
 WL! Which one of the following routes is the greatest and busiest ocean route in the world?
Question 310.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding mineral production India: in 1. India’s richest haematite deposits located in Barabil-Koira valley are situated in Jharkhand. 2. Madhya Pradesh has become the largest producer of copper in India. 3. India is a major producer of silver in the World. Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 311.----------------
 With reference to Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana consider the following statements 1. Ministry of child development will be implementing the scheme. women and 2. Aimistoempower womeninagriculture by making systematic investments to enhance their participation and productivity. 3. More than 80% of rural women are engaged in agriculture activities for their livelihoods. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 312.----------------
  With reference to Small Finance Banks consider the following statements 1. Minimumcapitalnetworthrequirement shall be Rs 200 crore in general. 2. SFBswillbegivenscheduledbankstatus immediately upon commencement of operations 3. Payments Banks can apply for conversion into SFB after five years of operations. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 313.----------------
 Industrial Code 2019 that was in news recently introduced in the Parliament seeks to replace which of the following laws Unions Act 1926 and Industrial 1946 Insolvency code 2016 Trade Unions Act 1926 and Industrial Employment code 2016 and Trade Unions Act 1926 Payment of Bonus Act 1965 Industrial Disputes Act 1947 and Trade Unions Act 1926
Question 314.----------------
  Which of the following is/are earth 1. CartoSat 3 ResourceSat  RISAT OceanSat Choose the correct option
Question 315.----------------
  With reference to Mega Food Park Scheme consider the following statements The Mega Food Park Scheme is based on “Cluster” approach The Mega Food Park project is implemented by a Special Purpose Vehicle SPV) whichisa Body Corporate registered under the Companies Act. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 316.----------------
 RERERERERE Consider the following statements: 1. The world’s biggest coal mine is in the United States. 2. Australia is the largest producer of coal. 3. China is the second-largest consumer of coal after the United States. Which of the above statements are correct?
Question 317.----------------
 “Asian mainland is composed of varied physiography and vegetation due to its location from the tropical region in the south to Arctic Circle in the north”. Consider the following statements regarding the vegetation of Asia: 1. There has been a considerable shift in the vegetation of south-east Asia from tropical evergreen forest to the deciduous forest due to the degeneration of tropical grassland due to wildfire. 2. Spruce larch fir dominant softwood trees of the Taiga region of Asia. and pine are Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 318.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Hawaii Islands of the Pacific Ocean: 1. The Island of Hawaii is an archipelago of eight major Islands which are of voleanic origin. 2. Hawaii which is the largest island of the archipelago is an Island Arc. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 319.----------------
 Which of the following pairs is/are incorrectly matched? 1. Zagros Mountains: Iran 2. Elburz Mountains: Turkey 3. Atlas Mountains: Tunisia Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 320.----------------
 Which of the following are the regions of the Mediterranean climate? 1. California 2. South-West Africa 3. Northern Australia Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 321.----------------
 Which of the following countries are located around the Black Sea? 1. Turkey 2. Bulgaria  Romania 4. Moldova 5. Ukraine Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 322.----------------
 If one starts at the Keoladeo National Park and reaches Guindy National Park how many minimum numbers of states she has to pass through?
Question 323.----------------
 Which of the following districts is not present in the Bodoland Territorial Area Districts?
Question 324.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding a river: 1. Inits upper reaches it is known as the Banda River. 2. Itseparates Goa from Maharashtra. Which of the following rivers is described above?
Question 325.----------------
 Which of the following hill ranges does not fall on the Indo-Myanmar border? 1. Lushai Hills 2. Chin Hills 3. Mikir Hills 4. Barail range Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 326.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding Mica reserves in India is/are correct? 1. Mica occurs only in sedimentary rock system. 2. Andhra Pradesh leads in country’s total resources followed by Jharkhand. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 327.----------------
 Consider the following pairs regarding types of coal reserves in India: 1. Tertiary coalfield: Assam 2. Girdih coalfield: Coking coal 3. Anthracite Coal: Jammu and Kashmir Which of the above pairs is correctly matched?
Question 328.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding Natural gas reserves in India is/are correct? 1. In India onshore areas are the largest reserve of natural gas. 2. Gujarat is the second-largest natural gas producer after Assam. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 329.----------------
  Which of the following pair is/are correctly matched? Crops Largest producer in India 1. Sugarcane Uttar Pradesh 2. Wheat Punjab  Cotton Maharashtra 4. Rice West Bengal Select the correct answer using the code given below:
Question 330.----------------
 In which of the following regions/ states of India Shale Gas is found? 1. Gangetic plain 2. Assam-Arakan Basin 3. Rajasthan 4. Andhra Pradesh Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 331.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the Solar System: 1. All the terrestrial planets does not have rings around it. 2. All the planets have satellites around them. 3. Thegas planets are composed primarily of hydrogen and oxygen. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 332.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 3 only 1 and 2 only 1 and 3 only 1. Days and nights occur due to rotation of the Earth. was introduced by British people and was set one hour behind the Indian Which of the following statements is/are incorrect?
Question 333.----------------
 Consider the following regions: 1 only 2 only 1. Owen Fracture Zone 2. Cascadia subduction zone 3. Gakkel Ridge 4. Sunda Plate Which of the following are the regions of Convergent boundary?
Question 334.----------------
 Regarding the various geomorphic forces consider the following: 1. The Endogenetic forces make the surface uneven while the Exogenetic forces tries to level the surface. 2. The activity of wearing away the rocks of the land surface of the earth by external forces is called Denudation. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 335.----------------
 The Banihal-Qazigund tunnel is located in which of the mountain ranges of Jammu and Kashmir?
Question 336.----------------
  With reference to Battle of Koregaon consider the following statements 1. It was a battle between Mahar soldiers of the East India Company and massive Peshwa army led by Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. 2. The pillar was erected by the East India Company in memory of those who fought the battle. Which of the following statement is/are correct?
Question 337.----------------
 Consider the following statements about Budapest Convention 1. The convention is the sole legally binding international multilateral treaty on cybercrime which coordinates cybercrime investigations between nation-states and criminalizes certain cybercrime conduct. 2. India is a signatory to the convention. correct?
Question 338.----------------
 25) could not reach a consensus due to which of the following reasons 1. No consensus on rules under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement which deals with carbon trading or carbon markets 2. Lack of clarity on the creation of a financial mechanism dedicated to loss and damage 3. Exit of United States from Paris agreement has demotivated other countries towards climate change obligations. Choose the correct option:
Question 339.----------------
  Which state government has launched ‘Lado Campaign’ to eradicate child marriages?
Question 340.----------------
 Consider the following statements about The Asiatic Lion- 1. It is listed as ‘Endangered’ under the IUCN Red List. 2. Asiatic Lion Conservation Project has been launched by the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 341.----------------
 1 only 2 only REEREKREERERE Which of the following statements is/ are correct? 1. Sun rotates as it orbits the center of the Milky Way. 2. Different parts of the Sun rotate at different rates. Select the correct option using the codes given below
Question 342.----------------
 Which of the following statements is/ are incorrect? 1. The temperature in the atmosphere is more than that at the surface of the Sun. 2. Likeofthe Earth the magnetic polarity of the Sun also changes.s Select the correct option using the codes given below
Question 343.----------------
 Consider the following statements: 1. Aurorae occur in the troposphere of the Earth due to incoming Solar Winds 2. Only Earth can have auroras/aurorae. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 344.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Van Allen belt: 1. It is the outer boundary of the Earth’s Magnetosphere. 2. The inner Van Allen belt is composed predominantly of protons and the outer belt mostly electrons. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 345.----------------
 Which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched? 1. Melanesia: North Pacific Ocean 2. Micronesia: South Pacific Ocean 3. Macaronesia: North Atlantic Ocean Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 346.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the measurement of Earthquakes: 1. While the Mercalli scale measures the intensity of an earthquake based on its 2. The Mercalli scale is logarithmic whereas the Richter scale is linear in nature. Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
Question 347.----------------
 With reference to gradation’ or leveling of land consider the following statements: 1. All the agents of gradation are controlled by climatic conditions. 2. Gradation is nature’s attempt to achieve a balance between erosion and deposition. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 348.----------------
 Which of the following statements regarding folding is/are correct? 1. Ifthe limbs of a fold are parallel to the axial plane it is called symmetrical fold. 2. A recumbent fold has an essentially horizontal axial plane. 3. Nappe is an exclusive feature of faulting. Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 349.----------------
 Which of the following pairs is/are incorrectly matched? 1. Kerguelen Plateau: Largest plateau 2. Iberian Plateau: Chile 3. Mascarene Plateau: Indian Ocean 4. Massif Central: France Select the correct option using the codes given below:
Question 350.----------------
 Iron & steel is the driving force behind industrial development in any country. With this reference consider the following statements: 1. In India most of the iron ore present are of pre-Cambrian age. 2. Western Ghat is the main reserve of the Haematite ore. 3. Jharkhand has the largest reserves of magnetite deposit in India. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
Question 351.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Earthquake Waves: 1. All natural earthquakes take place in the asthenosphere. 2. Body waves are faster than Surface waves and arrive first at the Surface hence they are more damaging than surface waves. 3. S-Waves propagation reveals that the outer core of the Earth is in liquid form. 4. P- Waves propagate longitudinally while S-Waves transversally. Which of the above statements incorrect?
Question 352.----------------
 is/are Consider the following description: In 1900 a theory of the origin of the earth was developed. It considered that a wandering star approached the sun. As a result a cigar-shaped extension of the material was separated from the solar surface. As the passing star moved away the material separated from the solar surface continued to revolve around the sun and it slowly condensed into planets. Which of the following theories is discussed in the above-given passage?
Question 353.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Mass Movement: 1. Mass movements are aided by gravity. 2. No geomorphic agent like running water glaciers wind waves and currents participate in the process of mass movements. 3. Mass movements are very active over unweathered materials. Which of the above statements correct?
Question 354.----------------
 is/are The main reason that the Earth experiences the highest temperature in the subtropics in the northern hemisphere rather than at the Equator is: cloud cover than equatorial areas. Subtropical areas have longer day hours in the summer than the equatorial. “greenhouse effect” compared to equatorial areas.
Question 355.----------------
 oceanic areas than the equatorial locations. Consider the following oceanic features and their characteristics: 1. Continental Shelf: Active voleanoes and strong earthquake. 2. Continental Slope: trenches. Canyons and 3. Deep-Sea Plain:  flattest and smoothest regions. Which of the above pairs is/are correctly matched?
Question 356.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Volcanism: 1. Usually asthenosphere is the source of magma. 2. Lavadomes made upof small fragments of lava from a single vent that has been blown up. 3. Shield voleanoes are voleanoes shaped like a bowl in the middle with long gentle slopes made by basaltic lava flows. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 357.----------------
  Which of the following statements is incorrect regarding the settlement hierarchy? When many individual units are cluster together they form hamlets. When many hamlets combine they from a village. population of at least one million living in its urban agglomeration.
Question 358.----------------
 Cities with population of 5 million and above are known as mega cities. The definition of urban areas has been refined in 2011 according to which urban areas are comprised of two types of administrative units—Statutory Towns and Census Towns. What are the necessary conditions that needed to be fulfilled for a town to be declared as a Census Town? 1. A minimum population of 5000 2. At least 75 percent of male working population engaged in non-agricultural sector 3. Adensity of population of at least 4000 persons per square kilometer Select the correct option from the codes given below:
Question 359.----------------
 Which of the following is not one the Approaches to Human Development?
Question 360.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding the UN-Habitat: 1. It is a UN agency responsible for sustainable urban development and human settlements. 2. Headquartered in UN Office at Nairobi.  Currently India holds the presidentship of UN-Habitat Alliance. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 361.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 1. The Programme is launched by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 2. A beneficiary is eligible to receive benefits under the scheme only once. 3. It is been implemented only in some selected districts of India on Pilot basis. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 362.----------------
 Consider the following statements regarding One-horn Rhino 1. The Indian rhinoceros are ranged throughout the entire stretch of the Indo-Gangetic Plain currently. 2. Itis listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List. 3. The Indian rhinoceros is regionally extinct in Pakistan. Which of the following statements is/are correct?
Question 363.----------------
 Which of the following statements is correct about the Principle of Non- refoulement? 1. Principle of Non-refoulement forbids a country receiving asylum seekers from returning them to a country in which they would be in likely danger of persecution. 2. The persecution has to be on the basis of race religion nationality membership of a particular social group or even political opinion. 3. The principle also applies to states that are not parties to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol. Choose the correct answer:
Question 364.----------------
 Koraga community won the Gold Award of 2019 World Habitat Awards. Which of the following statements are correct about Koraga community? 1. Koragas is a community of mainly basket-weavers found in South of India. 2. The practice of ‘Ajalu is associated with Koraga community. 3. Koragas are classified by the Government of India as a Scheduled Caste. Choose the correct answer:
Question 365.----------------
  Which of the following committees were set up for recommending on reforming criminal justice system? 1. Vohra Committee 2. Malimath Committee 3. Wadhwa Committee 4. Shanta Kumar Committee Choose the correct option:
Question 366.----------------
 RERERERERE